
# FAQ
Why not nanoseconds (instead of ms): most commodity hardwares and computers do not have a precise clock in nanoseconds.
Why not Publish&Subscribe: fundamentally the system is not compatible with any paradigm that requires multiple consumers to receive the same message. Because the timeline is mutable and messages are moved back and forth, only one consumer has to handle a message at a specific time (having a lease). 
Non-persistence? If you want a non-persistent queue probably nats.io or akka are a better solution for that use case
Why not real-time? DejaQ is optimized for a longer period of time between producing and consuming a messages (at least a few seconds), if you want a low latency probably you will also need a FIFO queue and not an arbitrary order of processing (where this system excels). In that case Other solutions are more suited like Kafka or nats.io 
Can be used as a commit log? Not really, the advantages are the timeline mutability and messaging processing. Kafka and other similar systems are more suited for this kind of storage.
Distributed cronjob? It can be used for such a thing, but other systems excels at this specific need like Chronos.
Why does the broker exists? If we implemented the logic as a library we would force all the USER apps to update as often as we push a new version, having the logic in a separate project we can iterate things faster. Also it would have been difficult to guarantee the leases unicity and message to be fetched only by 1 consumer. Other features would have increased the gossip traffic between all the libraries. 
